atītya bālyaṃ jagatāṃ pate tvamupetya paugaṇḍavayo manojñaṃ |
upekṣya vatsāvanamutsavena prāvartathā gogaṇapālanāyām ||1||
atītya bālyam	passing childhood
jagatāṃ pate	O Lord of the universe
tvam-upetya	Thou attained
paugaṇḍa-vaya: manojñam	the boyhood age (which was very) charming
upekṣya vatsāvanam-	giving up tending the calves
utsavena prāvartathā	enthusiastically got into
go-gaṇa-pālanāyām	the looking after of the herd of cows
O Lord of the universe! Having passed childhood Thou attained the charming age of boyhood (6 to 10 years). Then Thou gave up the tending of the calves and enthusiastically promoted to herding cows and cattle.
upakramasyānuguṇaiva seyaṃ marutpurādhīśa tava pravṛtti: |
gotrāparitrāṇakṛte'vatīrṇastadeva devā''rabhathāstadā yat ||2||
upakramasya-	for the beginning
anuguṇa-eva	it was proper indeed
sā-iyaṃ	that this
marutpurādhīśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur
tava pravṛtti:	Thy occupation (because)
gotrā-paritrāṇa-	(for) the earth's protection
kṛte-avatīrṇa:-	as the purpose, was Thy incarnation
tat-eva	that itself
deva-ārabhathā:-	O Lord Thou started
tadā yat	then because
O Lord! This occupation that Thou took up was the fit and proper beginning for the work which lay ahead. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Thy incarnation was for the protection of 'Gotra', the earth, and tending 'Gotras', the cows, was a first step towards that end.
kadāpi rāmeṇa samaṃ vanānte vanaśriyaṃ vīkṣya caran sukhena |
śrīdāmanāmna: svasakhasya vācā modādagā dhenukakānanaṃ tvam ||3||
kadāpi rāmeṇa samaṃ	once along with Balaraam
vanānte	in the end of the woods
vanaśriyaṃ vīkṣya	the beauty of the woods admiring
caran sukhena	and roaming about happily
śrīdāma-nāmna:	by the name of Shreedaamaa
svasakhasya vācā	Thy friend's suggestion
modāt-agā:	with joy went
dhenuka-kānanaṃ	to the Dhenuka forest
tvam	Thou
Once, with Balaraam, as Thou were happily roaming about in the woods and admiring the beauty of the woods, on Thy friend Sudaamaa's suggestion, Thou enthusiastically entered the Dhenuka forest.
uttālatālīnivahe tvaduktyā balena dhūte'tha balena dorbhyām |
mṛdu: kharaścābhyapatatpurastāt phalotkaro dhenukadānavo'pi ||4||
uttāla-tālī-nivahe	(when) the tall palm tree clusters
tvat-uktyā	at Thy words
balena dhūte-atha	by Balaraam was shaken, then,
balena dorbhyām	with the force of both the hands
mṛdu: khara:-ca-	soft/ripe and hard/unripe
abhyapatat-purastāt	fell down in front
phala-utkara:	a bunch of fruits
dhenuka-dānava:-api	the Dhenuka demon also
(khara:-ca abhyapatat)	(as a donkey appeared)
At Thy words, Balaraam shook the cluster of tall palm trees with the force of both his strong arms. A bunch of soft and ripe and hard and unripe fruits fell in front of Thee. Just then, the demon Dhenukaasura, in the form of a donkey also appeared.
samudyato dhainukapālane'haṃ kathaṃ vadhaṃ dhainukamadya kurve |
itīva matvā dhruvamagrajena suraughayoddhāramajīghanastvam ||5||
samudyata:	engaged in
dhainuka-pālane-ahaṃ	the cows' protection, I
kathaṃ	how
vadhaṃ dhainukam-adya	(can I) kill Dhenuka (even though just a namesake) now
kurve iti-iva	do so , thus like that
matvā	thinking
dhruvam-agrajena	certainly by Thy elder brother
suraugha-yoddhāram-	the enemy of the gods
ajīghana:-tvam	caused to be killed Thou
I am engaged in protecting the cows (Dhenuka), how can I now kill the Dhenuka (cow) asura?' Thus interpreting, as it were, Thou made Balaraam Thy elder brother kill Dhenukaasura who was an enemy of the gods.
tadīyabhṛtyānapi jambukatvenopāgatānagrajasaṃyutastvam |
jambūphalānīva tadā nirāsthastāleṣu khelan bhagavan nirāstha: ||6||
tadīya-bhṛtyān-api	his (Dhenukaasura's) servants also
jambukatvena-upāgatān-	(who were) as jackals and had come
agraja-saṃyuta:-tvam	along with Thy elder brother Thou
jambu-phalāni-iva	like black-berries
tadā nirāstha:-	then smashed
tāleṣu khelan	on the palm trees as mere play
bhagavan	O Lord
nirāstha:	effortlessly
Dhenukaasura's servants had also come in the form of jackals. O Lord! Thou and Thy elder brother, as if in mere play, smashed them effortlessly against the palm trees as though they were mere black-berries.
vinighnati tvayyatha jambukaughaṃ sanāmakatvādvaruṇastadānīm |
bhayākulo jambukanāmadheyaṃ śrutiprasiddhaṃ vyadhiteti manye ||7||
vinighnati	when killing
tvayi atha	Thou (were) then
jambuka-aughaṃ	the pack of jackals
sanāmakatvāt-	because of having the same name
varuṇa:-tadānīm	Varuna, then
bhayākula:	out of fear
jambuka-nāma-dheyaṃ	his name 'Jambuka'
śruti-prasiddhaṃ vyadhita-	famous in the Vedas, hid it (in the Vedas only)
iti manye	this I believe
Then when Thou were killing the pack of jackals, Jambukas, Varuna, the water god, whose name is famous in the Vedas as Jambuka, hid it in the Vedas only, for the fear of being killed. I believe that it is for this reason that Varuna's name as 'Jambuka' is not known.
tavāvatārasya phalaṃ murāre sañjātamadyeti surairnutastvam |
satyaṃ phalaṃ jātamiheti hāsī bālai: samaṃ tālaphalānyabhuṅkthā: ||8||
tava-avatārasya phalaṃ	Thy incarnation's results
murāre	O Slayer of Mura!
sañjatam-adya-	has appeared now
iti surai:-nuta: tvam	thus by the gods, being praised, Thou
satyaṃ phalaṃ	truly fruit
jātam-iha-iti	is born here thus
hāsī bālai: samaṃ	laughingly (saying) with the boys
tāla phalāni-	the palm fruits
abhuṅkthā:	ate
O Slayer of Mura! The gods praised Thee saying that the fruit of Thy incarnation has now appeared. Thou laughingly said that 'indeed the fruits of the palm tree have been got now', and saying so, ate the fruits with the boys.
madhudravasrunti bṛhanti tāni phalāni medobharabhṛnti bhuktvā |
tṛptaiśca dṛptairbhavanaṃ phalaughaṃ vahadbhirāgā: khalu bālakaistvam ||9||
madhudrava-srunti	with honey like juice dripping
bṛhanti tāni phalāni	those large fruits
medobhara-bhṛnti	full of flesh
bhuktvā tṛptai:-ca	having eaten and satisfied
dṛptai:-bhavanaṃ	and triumphant, to the house
phalaughaṃ vahadbhi:-	loads of fruit carrying
āgā: khalu	returned indeed
bālakai:-tvam	with the boys, Thou
Thou ate the nectar like juice dripping luscious and fleshy fruits with the boys to Thy heart's content. Fully satisfied and triumphant Thou returned to the house carrying along loads of such fruits.
hato hato dhenuka ityupetya phalānyadadbhirmadhurāṇi lokai: |
jayeti jīveti nuto vibho tvaṃ marutpurādhīśvara pāhi rogāt ||10||
hata: hata: dhenuka:	killed killed is Dhenuka
iti-upetya	thus (saying and) approaching
phalāni-adadbhi:-	the fruits eating
madhurāṇi	(which were) sweet
lokai: jaya-iti	by the people, 'Victory to Thee'
jīva-iti	long live' thus
nuta: vibho tvaṃ	praised O Lord Thou
marutpurādhīśvara	O Lord of Guruvaayur
pāhi rogāt	save from ailments
O Omnipresent and Omnipotent Lord! The people approached Thee cheering that Dhenukaasura was killed. They praised Thee saying, 'Victory to Thee', 'May Thou live long', as they ate the sweet fruits. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Do save me from my ailments.